Sports Injuries–Types, Symptoms, & Risk Factors | NIAMS

 Skip to main content
 

 An official website of the United States government
 

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov
A
 
.gov
 website belongs to an official government
 organization in the United States.
 

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
 
lock
 (
 

Lock

Locked padlock icon

 
) or 
https://
 means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
 

 

Top Utility Nav

 Portal en español

Site search

Mega Menu

 

Home

 

Health Topics

Health Topics

Arthritis and Rheumatic Diseases

Muscle and Bone Diseases

Skin Diseases

All Diseases and Conditions

Educational Resources for Students and Teachers

 

Grants & Funding

Grants & Funding

Current Funding Opportunities

Supported Scientific Programs

NIAMS-Supported Programs

Applying for a Grant

NIH Policies and Guidance

Scientific Peer Review

Grants Administration

NIH Loan Repayment Program

Training and Career Development

 

Labs @ NIAMS

Labs @ NIAMS

NIAMS Labs and Core Facilities

Research Faculty

Research Areas

NIAMS Scientific Advances

Career Development and Outreach @ NIAMS

 

Clinical Trials

Clinical Trials

For Principal Investigators

Clinical Trial Policies, Guidelines, and Templates

Conducting Clinical Trials

Register with ClinicalTrials.gov

For Patients
What is a Clinical Trial?
Clinical Trials at NIAMS

 

News & Events

Newsroom

All NIAMS News

Meetings & Events

 

About NIAMS

About NIAMS

NIAMS Leadership

NIAMS Organization

Strategic Plan FY 2025-2029

NIAMS Budget

Working Groups and Committees

NIAMS Coalition

Contact Us

Breadcrumb

Home

Health Topics

Sports Injuries

English
Español

 

Sports Injuries

Print

 

 Overview, Symptoms, & Causes
 

 Diagnosis, Treatment, & Steps to Take
 

 Research & Resources
 

Overview of Sports Injuries
The term “sports injury” refers to the kinds of injuries that most commonly occur during sports or exercise, but they are not limited to athletes. Factory workers get tennis elbow, painters get shoulder injuries, and gardeners develop tendinitis, even though they may not participate in sports. Ultimately, however, “sports injuries” refers to those that occur in active individuals. This health topic focuses on the most common types of sports injuries—those that affect the musculoskeletal system. The musculoskeletal system is the network of muscles, tendons, ligaments, bones, and other tissues that provides the body with stability and enables movement.
Sports injuries are divided into two broad categories, acute and chronic injuries. Acute injuries happen suddenly, such as when a person falls,  receives a blow, or twists a joint, while chronic injuries usually result from overuse of one area of the body (repetitive overload) and develop gradually over time. Examples of acute injuries are sprains and dislocations, while some common chronic injuries are tennis elbow and stress fractures.
Treatment for a sports injury depends on the type of injury, but many can be treated at home by resting, icing, compressing, and elevating (R-I-C-E) the injured part of the body. For severe injuries, you will need to see a health care provider, who may recommend a course of physical therapy for rehabilitation and/or a cast, splint, or brace. In some cases, you may need surgery. A rehabilitation program that includes exercise and other types of therapy is usually recommended before resuming the sport or activity that caused the injury.
While adverse events do sometimes happen when playing sports or exercising, most physical activity is safe for almost everyone, and the health and social benefits far outweigh the risks.

Who Gets Sports Injuries?
Anyone can suffer a sports injury, but several factors can increase the risk of sustaining injury.
The risk factors for sports injuries include:
Not using the correct exercise techniques.
Overtraining, either by training too often, too frequently, or for too long.
Increasing your intensity of physical activity too quickly.
Playing the same sport year-round.
Running or jumping on hard surfaces.
Wearing shoes that do not have enough support.
Not wearing the proper equipment.
Having had a prior injury.
Having certain anatomical features specific to each joint or poor flexibility.
Taking certain medications, such as fluoroquinolones, a class of antibiotics linked to tendinitis and tendon rupture.
The type of injury you are most vulnerable to depends on the type of activity you participate in, your age, and your sex.

Types of Sports Injuries
Sports injuries are broadly categorized into two kinds:
Acute injuries, which happen suddenly.
Chronic injuries, which are usually related to repetitive loading or overuse and develop gradually over time. Occasionally, wear and tear from overuse injuries can set the stage for acute injuries.
Types of Musculoskeletal Injuries
Injuries to the musculoskeletal system that are common in athletes include fractures, dislocations, sprains, strains, tendinitis, or bursitis. These terms are defined below.
Bone fracture.
 A fracture is a break in a bone that occurs from either a quick, one-time injury, known as an acute fracture, or from repetitive stress, known as a stress fracture. 
Growth plate fractures
 are unique to children who are still growing.
Acute fractures.
 A fall, car accident, or collision or direct contact can cause a fracture, and the severity depends on the force that caused the break. The bone may crack, break all the way through, or break into many pieces. Injuries that break through the skin to the bone, which are known as open fractures, are especially serious because there is an increased risk of infection. Most acute fractures require an immediate visit to a health care provider.
Stress fractures.
 Stress fractures occur largely in the weight-bearing bones of the lower extremity. These include the femur, tibia and fibula, and foot bones. They are common in sports where there is repetitive impact, primarily running or jumping sports such as gymnastics, tennis, basketball, or track and field. Running creates forces two to three times a person’s body weight on the lower limbs.
Growth plate fractures.
 The growth plate is an area of cartilage near the ends of long bones, and they enable the bones to lengthen until children reach their full height. Growth plates are especially vulnerable to injury until they are converted to bone. Each bone growth plate closes at a different age, typically by or around age 18. Growth plate fractures can result from a single traumatic event, such as a fall or car accident, or from chronic stress and overuse. 
Dislocation.
 When the two bones that come together to form a joint become completely separated, the joint is described as dislocated. Contact sports such as football and basketball, as well as high-impact sports and sports that involve significant contact, falling, or extreme loads cause most dislocations. A dislocated joint typically requires immediate medical treatment, but sometimes the bones move back into place on their own. A dislocation is a painful injury and is most common in shoulders, elbows, fingers, kneecap, and femur-tibia or knee.
Sprain.
 Sprains can range from minimal stretching of to partial or complete tears of ligaments, the bands of connective tissue that join the end of one bone with another to stabilize a joint. Sprains are caused by trauma such as a fall or blow that stresses a joint out of position. Sprains can range from first degree (minimally stretched ligament) to third degree (a complete tear). Areas of the body most vulnerable to sprains are ankles, knees, and wrists.
Strain.
 A strain is a twist, pull, or tear of a muscle, muscle-tendon juncture (where muscle and tendon connect), or a tendon itself. A tendon is a cord of tissue connecting muscle to bone. Athletes who play contact sports can get strains, but they can also happen from repeating the same motion again and again, as in tennis or golf. Like sprains, strains can range from a minor stretch to a partial or complete tear of a muscle or tendon. This is most common in muscle or tendons between two joints.  
Tendinitis.
 Tendinitis is inflammation of a tendon, a flexible band of fibrous tissue that connects muscles to bones. It often affects the shoulder, elbow, wrist, hip, knee, or ankle. Tendinitis can be caused by a sudden injury, but it usually results from carrying out the same motion over and over. People such as carpenters, gardeners, musicians, and certain types of athletes, such as golfers and tennis players, have a higher risk of tendinitis. Tendons become less flexible as you age, so you are more likely to get tendinitis as you get older.
Bursitis.
 Bursitis is inflammation of the bursae (plural of “bursa”), small, fluid-filled sacs that act as cushions between a bone and other moving parts, such as muscles, tendons, or skin. Bursitis can be caused by a one-time event like a blow or fall. It can also result from repeating the same motion many times, like throwing a ball, or from prolonged pressure, such as from kneeling on a hard surface or leaning on the elbows. It usually affects the shoulders, elbows, hips, or knees.
Common Sports Injuries
Most sports injuries involve one or more of the types of musculoskeletal injuries described above. The joints are particularly susceptible because a person’s body places significant demands on them. Joints must provide both stability and flexibility, and they are complex structures that include several interconnected parts.
Some of the common injuries experienced by athletes and people who have jobs or hobbies that involve doing a repetitive motion include:
Shoulder Injuries
Rotator cuff injury.
 These are common shoulder injuries. The rotator cuff is a group of four muscles and tendons that stabilize the shoulder joint. Rotator cuff injuries happen when the tendons or bursae near the joint become inflamed from overuse or a sudden injury. They are common in people with jobs that involve overhead motions, like painters, or athletes who repeatedly reach upward, such as tennis players and swimmers.
Impingement.
 This happens when the top of the shoulder blade puts pressure on the soft tissues beneath it (bursa and rotator cuff) when the arm is lifted. Tendinitis and bursitis can develop, limiting movement and causing pain. Repeated overhead movements, such as those used by swimmers, increase the risk of impingement.
Instability.
 Shoulder instability happens when the round end of the upper arm bone (golf ball shaped) is forced out of its shallow socket (shaped like a golf tee), either partially or completely. Once the labrum (tissue around the socket) and shoulder ligaments become stretched or torn, the shoulder becomes “loose” and dislocations can occur repeatedly.
Elbow Injuries
Tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis).
 When you play tennis or other racket sports, the tendons in the elbow can develop small tears, wear down, and become inflamed, causing pain on the outside of the elbow. Painters, plumbers, carpenters, and others who repetitively use their forearms are also at higher risk of getting tennis elbow.
Golfer’s elbow (medial epicondylitis).
 This is a form of tendinitis that causes pain in the inner part of the elbow. Pain may spread to the forearm and wrist. Golfers and others who repeatedly use their wrists or clench their fingers can develop it. 
Little league elbow.
 This is a repetitive growth plate injury to the elbow caused by youths overloading their growth plate by throwing. It is most common in pitchers, but any young athlete who throws repeatedly can get it. The pain is in the inner part of the elbow.
Ulnar collateral ligament injury.
 Repeated throwing can cause tears to this ligament on the inner part of the elbow, causing pain and decreased throwing effectiveness.
Knee Injuries
Runner’s knee.
 This condition causes pain or tenderness close to or under the kneecap (patella) at the front of the knee. It is common in runners, but it also affects people who are active in other ways, such as those who hike or cycle.
Fracture.
 Fractures can happen in any bone around the knee, but the kneecap (patella) is the most common, usually as a result of an event like a bad fall or a blow to the knee.
Dislocation.
 A large impact to the knee can cause the kneecap to be forced from the groove in the thigh bone (femur) and pushed out of alignment, causing the kneecap to slip out of position.
Torn ligament.
 When the knee is overextended or twisted, the ligaments within it can tear. Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries are especially common in athletes. They often happen when the person changes direction suddenly or lands from a jump.
Meniscal tear.
 Meniscal cartilage serves as a shock absorber in the knee. An awkward twist or pivot can cause a tear. They are commonly torn when the knee suffers a sprain or complete tear of the knee ligaments.
Tendon tear.
 Tendon tears tend to be more common in middle-aged people who play sports that involve running and jumping. They often happen because of a forceful landing and sometimes from an awkward jump.
Leg Injuries
Groin pull.
 Quick side-to-side motions can strain the muscles of the inner thighs and lead to a groin pull. People who play sports such as hockey, soccer, football, and baseball have a higher risk of groin pulls.
Hamstring strain.
 Three muscles run along the back of the thigh and form the hamstring. Activities that involve a lot of running, jumping, and sudden starts and stops place you at risk of a hamstring strain. Basketball, football, and soccer players commonly get them.
Shin splints.
 Shin splints refer to the pain caused by inflammation of the muscle's attachment along the inside length of the shinbone (tibia), the large bone in the front of the lower leg. The pain is usually on the inner side of the lower leg. Shin splints are primarily seen in runners, particularly those just starting a running program.
Ankle Injuries
Ankle sprain.
 You can sprain your ankle when you roll, twist, or turn your ankle in an awkward way, stretching or tearing the ligaments in the joint. It can happen when you land awkwardly when jumping or pivoting, when walking on an uneven surface, or when you land on someone else's foot. People who play sports in which there is a lot of pivoting, such as volleyball and basketball, are at risk of an ankle sprain.
Achilles tendinitis.
 An Achilles tendon injury results from a stretch, tear, or irritation to the tendon connecting the calf muscle to the back of the heel. The Achilles is the largest tendon in the body and you use it when you walk, run, climb stairs, jump, and stand on the tips of your toes. People with Achilles tendinitis usually feel pain and stiffness at the back of the heel, especially in the morning. Achilles tendinitis is usually a chronic condition caused by overuse, but serious cases can lead to a tear that may require surgery.

Symptoms of Sports Injuries
The symptoms of a sports injury depend on the type of injury you have.
Symptoms of an acute injury include:
Sudden, severe pain.
Extreme swelling or bruising.
Not being able to place weight on a leg, knee, ankle, or foot.
Not being able to move a joint normally.
Extreme weakness of an injured limb.
A bone or joint that is visibly out of place.
Symptoms of a chronic injury due to overuse include:
Pain when you play or exercise.
Swelling and a dull ache when you rest.

Cause of Sports Injuries
The cause of an acute sports injury is a force of impact that is greater than the body part can withstand, while a chronic injury is typically due to repeating the same motion over and over again (repetitive overload). Sometimes, overuse injuries can degrade tissues and joints and set the stage for an acute injury.

Download PDF

View all Diseases and Conditions

Learn About Research

Find a Clinical Trial

Read Journal Articles

Print

 
Last Reviewed: 
 
September 2024

 

About NIAMS

Contact Us

Multimedia Library

Accessibility

Disclaimer

No FEAR Act Data

Privacy Statement and Comment Policy

HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)

Office of the Inspector General

Follow us on

Back to Top