Non-surgical treatment of lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials - Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews - NCBI Bookshelf

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know

The .gov means it's official.

 Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before
 sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal
 government site.
 

The site is secure.

 The 
https://
 ensures that you are connecting to the
 official website and that any information you provide is encrypted
 and transmitted securely.
 

Log in

Show account info

Close

Account

 Logged in as:

username

Dashboard

Publications

Account settings

Log out

Access keys

NCBI Homepage

MyNCBI Homepage

Main Content

Main Navigation

Bookshelf

Search database
Books
All Databases
Assembly
Biocollections
BioProject
BioSample
Books
ClinVar
Conserved Domains
dbGaP
dbVar
Gene
Genome
GEO DataSets
GEO Profiles
GTR
Identical Protein Groups
MedGen
MeSH
NLM Catalog
Nucleotide
OMIM
PMC
Protein
Protein Clusters
Protein Family Models
PubChem BioAssay
PubChem Compound
PubChem Substance
PubMed
SNP
SRA
Structure
Taxonomy
ToolKit
ToolKitAll
ToolKitBookgh
Search term
Search

Browse Titles

Advanced

Help

Disclaimer

NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews [Internet]. York (UK): Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (UK); 1995-. 
Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews [Internet].
Show details
York (UK): 
Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (UK)
; 1995-.
Search term
 

Non-surgical treatment of lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials
Review published: 
2014
.
Bibliographic details: Sims SE, Miller K, Elfar JC, Hammert WC.  Non-surgical treatment of lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Hand 2014; 9(4): 419-446. [
PMC free article
: PMC4235906
] [
PubMed
: 25414603
]
Abstract
BACKGROUND:
 Non-surgical approaches to treatment of lateral epicondylitis are numerous. The aim of this systematic review is to examine randomized, controlled trials of these treatments.
METHODS:
 Numerous databases were systematically searched from earliest records to February 2013. Search terms included "lateral epicondylitis," "lateral elbow pain," "tennis elbow," "lateral epicondylalgia," and "elbow tendinopathy" combined with "randomized controlled trial." Two reviewers examined the literature for eligibility via article abstract and full text.
RESULTS:
 Fifty-eight articles met eligibility criteria: (1) a target population of patients with symptoms of lateral epicondylitis; (2) evaluation of treatment of lateral epicondylitis with the following non-surgical techniques: corticosteroid injection, injection technique, iontophoresis, botulinum toxin A injection, prolotherapy, platelet-rich plasma or autologous blood injection, bracing, physical therapy, shockwave therapy, or laser therapy; and (3) a randomized controlled trial design. Lateral epicondylitis is a condition that is usually self-limited. There may be a short-term pain relief advantage found with the application of corticosteroids, but no demonstrable long-term pain relief. Injection of botulinum toxin A and prolotherapy are superior to placebo but not to corticosteroids, and botulinum toxin A is likely to produce concomitant extensor weakness. Platelet-rich plasma or autologous blood injections have been found to be both more and less effective than corticosteroid injections. Non-invasive treatment methods such as bracing, physical therapy, and extracorporeal shockwave therapy do not appear to provide definitive benefit regarding pain relief. Some studies of low-level laser therapy show superiority to placebo whereas others do not.
CONCLUSIONS:
 There are multiple randomized controlled trials for non-surgical management of lateral epicondylitis, but the existing literature does not provide conclusive evidence that there is one preferred method of non-surgical treatment for this condition. Lateral epicondylitis is a condition that is usually self-limited, resolving over a 12- to 18-month period without treatment.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE:
 Therapeutic Level II. See Instructions to Authors for a complete description of level of evidence.

Copyright
 © 2014 University of York.
Bookshelf ID: NBK291430

Share

Views
PubReader
Print View
Cite this Page
Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews [Internet]. York (UK): Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (UK); 1995-. Non-surgical treatment of lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. 2014.
Similar articles in PubMed
Comparative effectiveness of injection therapies in lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
[Am J Sports Med. 2013]
Comparative effectiveness of injection therapies in lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Krogh TP, Bartels EM, Ellingsen T, Stengaard-Pedersen K, Buchbinder R, Fredberg U, Bliddal H, Christensen R. 
Am J Sports Med. 2013 Jun; 41(6):1435-46. Epub 2012 Sep 12.
IMpact of Platelet Rich plasma OVer alternative therapies in patients with lateral Epicondylitis (IMPROVE): protocol for a multicenter randomized controlled study: a multicenter, randomized trial comparing autologous platelet-rich plasma, autologous whole blood, dry needle tendon fenestration, and physical therapy exercises alone on pain and quality of life in patients with lateral epicondylitis.
[Acad Radiol. 2014]
IMpact of Platelet Rich plasma OVer alternative therapies in patients with lateral Epicondylitis (IMPROVE): protocol for a multicenter randomized controlled study: a multicenter, randomized trial comparing autologous platelet-rich plasma, autologous whole blood, dry needle tendon fenestration, and physical therapy exercises alone on pain and quality of life in patients with lateral epicondylitis.
Chiavaras MM, Jacobson JA, Carlos R, Maida E, Bentley T, Simunovic N, Swinton M, Bhandari M. 
Acad Radiol. 2014 Sep; 21(9):1144-55. Epub 2014 Jul 9.
Extracorporeal Shock Wave Therapy Shows Superiority Over Injections for Pain Relief and Grip Strength Recovery in Lateral Epicondylitis: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-analysis.
[Arthroscopy. 2022]
Extracorporeal Shock Wave Therapy Shows Superiority Over Injections for Pain Relief and Grip Strength Recovery in Lateral Epicondylitis: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-analysis.
Liu WC, Chen CT, Lu CC, Tsai YC, Liu YC, Hsu CW, Shih CL, Chen PC, Fu YC. 
Arthroscopy. 2022 Jun; 38(6):2018-2034.e12. Epub 2022 Jan 31.
Efficacy and safety of corticosteroid injections and other injections for management of tendinopathy: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials.
[Lancet. 2010]
Efficacy and safety of corticosteroid injections and other injections for management of tendinopathy: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials.
Coombes BK, Bisset L, Vicenzino B. 
Lancet. 2010 Nov 20; 376(9754):1751-67. Epub 2010 Oct 21.
Corticosteroid and other injections in the management of tendinopathies: a review.
[Clin J Sport Med. 2011]
Corticosteroid and other injections in the management of tendinopathies: a review.
Hart L. 
Clin J Sport Med. 2011 Nov; 21(6):540-1. 
See reviews...
See all...
Recent Activity
Clear
Turn Off
Turn On
Non-surgical treatment of lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review of randomiz...
Non-surgical treatment of lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials - Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews
Your browsing activity is empty.
Activity recording is turned off.
Turn recording back on
See more...

Follow NCBI

Twitter

Facebook

LinkedIn

GitHub

NCBI Insights Blog

Connect with NLM

Twitter

Facebook

Youtube

National Library of Medicine

8600 Rockville Pike

 Bethesda, MD 20894

Web Policies

FOIA

HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

Help

Accessibility

Careers

NLM

NIH

HHS

USA.gov