Muscle strain treatment: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia

Skip navigation


 An official website of the United States government
 

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov
A
 
.gov
 website belongs to an official government
 organization in the United States.
 

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
 
lock
 (
 

Lock

Locked padlock icon

 
) or 
https://
 means you’ve safely connected to
 the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
 secure websites.
 

 National Library of Medicine 

The navigation menu has been collapsed.

Menu

Health Topics

Drugs & Supplements

Genetics

Medical Tests

Medical Encyclopedia

About MedlinePlus

Show 
Search

Search MedlinePlus

GO

About MedlinePlus

What's New

Site Map

Customer Support

Health Topics
Drugs & Supplements
Genetics
Medical Tests
Medical Encyclopedia

Español

You Are Here:

Home

 →
 

Medical Encyclopedia

 →
 

Muscle strain treatment

URL of this page: //medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002116.htm
 

Muscle strain treatment

Question:
How do you treat a 
muscle strain
?
Answer:
Rest the strained muscle and apply ice for the first few days after the injury. Wrap the ice in cloth. Do not place the ice directly on the skin.
Medicines such as ibuprofen, naproxen, or acetaminophen (Tylenol) also help reduce pain and swelling. As the pain decreases, you can use heat on the muscle.
Stretching and light exercises to bring blood to the injured area can also be useful. In general, stretching and warm compresses are helpful before exercises. Cooling down and icing the area after exercise can help.
Get medical help right away if:
You have a lot of swelling with the muscle strain.
You can't move your arms, legs, or joints.
You have swelling that is getting worse as time passes. 
Alternative Names

Treatment - muscle strain
Images

Treatment for leg strain

References

Biundo JJ, Canoso JJ. Bursitis, tendinopathy, other periarticular disorders, and sports medicine. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds. 
Goldman Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 242.
Geiderman JM, Torbati S. General principles of orthopedic injuries. In: Walls RM, ed. 
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 41.
Wang D, Eliasberg CD, Rodeo SA. Physiology and pathophysiology of musculoskeletal tissues. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR. eds. 
DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 1.

Review Date 4/1/2025

Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.

Learn how to cite this page

Health Content Provider
06/01/2028

A.D.A.M., Inc. is accredited by URAC
, for Health Content Provider (www.urac.org). URAC's 
accreditation program
 is an independent audit to verify that A.D.A.M. follows rigorous standards of quality and accountability. A.D.A.M. is among the first to achieve this important distinction for online health information and services. Learn more about A.D.A.M.'s 
editorial policy, editorial process
, and 
privacy policy
.
 

The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed medical professional should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. No warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied, is made as to the accuracy, reliability, timeliness, or correctness of any translations made by a third-party service of the information provided herein into any other language.

© 1997- 2026 A.D.A.M., a business unit of Ebix, Inc. Any duplication or distribution of the information contained herein is strictly prohibited.

All content on this site including text, images, graphics, audio, video, data, metadata, and compilations is protected by copyright and other intellectual property laws. You may view the content for personal, noncommercial use. Any other use requires prior written consent from Ebix. You may not copy, reproduce, distribute, transmit, display, publish, reverse-engineer, adapt, modify, store beyond ordinary browser caching, index, mine, scrape, or create derivative works from this content. You may not use automated tools to access or extract content, including to create embeddings, vectors, datasets, or indexes for retrieval systems. Use of any content for training, fine-tuning, calibrating, testing, evaluating, or improving AI systems of any kind is prohibited without express written consent. This includes large language models, machine learning models, neural networks, generative systems, retrieval-augmented systems, and any software that ingests content to produce outputs. Any unauthorized use of the content including AI-related use is a violation of our rights and may result in legal action, damages, and statutory penalties to the fullest extent permitted by law. Ebix reserves the right to enforce its rights through legal, technological, and contractual measures.

About MedlinePlus

What's New

Site Map

Customer Support

Subscribe to RSS

Connect with NLM 

NLM Web Policies

Copyright

Accessibility

Guidelines for Links

Viewers & Players

HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs

For Developers

National Library of Medicine

8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

National Institutes of Health