1. BMC Public Health. 2024 Oct 14;24(1):2820. doi: 10.1186/s12889-024-20248-8.

How, why and when are delayed (back-up) antibiotic prescriptions used in primary 
care? A realist review integrating concepts of uncertainty in healthcare.

Mcleod M(#)(1)(2), Campbell A(#)(1), Hayhoe B(3)(4), Borek AJ(5), Tonkin-Crine 
S(5)(6), Moore MV(7), Butler CC(5), Walker AS(6)(8)(9), Holmes A(1), Wong G(10); 
STEP-UP study team.

Collaborators: Anyanwu PE, Bright N, Buchanan J, Costelloe C, Hopkins S, Majeed 
A, Morrell L, Pouwels KB, Robotham JV, Roope LSJ, Wordsworth S, Wright C, Yadav 
S, Zalevski A.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Health Protection Research Unit 
in Healthcare Associated Infections and Antimicrobial Resistance, Imperial 
College London, London, UK.
(2)NIHR Imperial Patient Safety Translational Research Centre, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Primary Care and Public Health, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, UK.
(4)NIHR Applied Research Collaboration Northwest London, London, UK.
(5)Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.
(6)NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Healthcare Associated Infections and 
Antimicrobial Resistance, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(7)Primary Care, Population Sciences and Medical Education, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(8)NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK.
(9)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(10)Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK. geoffrey.wong@phc.ox.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Antimicrobial resistance is a global patient safety priority and 
inappropriate antimicrobial use is a key contributing factor. Evidence have 
shown that delayed (back-up) antibiotic prescriptions (DP) are an effective and 
safe strategy for reducing unnecessary antibiotic consumption but its use is 
controversial.
METHODS: We conducted a realist review to ask why, how, and in what contexts 
general practitioners (GPs) use DP. We searched five electronic databases for 
relevant articles and included DP-related data from interviews with healthcare 
professionals in a related study. Data were analysed using a realist 
theory-driven approach - theorising which context(s) influenced (mechanisms) 
resultant outcome(s) (context-mechanism-outcome-configurations: CMOCs).
RESULTS: Data were included from 76 articles and 41 interviews to develop a 
program theory comprising nine key and 56 related CMOCs. These explain the 
reasons for GPs' tolerance of risk to different uncertainties and how these may 
interact with GPs' work environment, self-efficacy and perceived patient 
concordance to make using DP as a safety-net or social tool more or less likely, 
at a given time-point. For example, when a GP uses clinical scores or diagnostic 
tests: a clearly high or low score/test result may mitigate scientific 
uncertainty and lead to an immediate or no antibiotic decision; an intermediary 
result may provoke hermeneutic (interpretation-related) uncertainty and lead to 
DP becoming preferred and used as a safety net. Our program theory explains how 
DP can be used to mitigate some uncertainties but also provoke or exacerbate 
others.
CONCLUSION: This review explains how, why and in what contexts GPs are more or 
less likely to use DP, as well as various uncertainties GPs face which DP may 
mitigate or provoke. We recommend that efforts to plan and implement 
interventions to optimise antibiotic prescribing in primary care consider these 
uncertainties and the contexts when DP may be (dis)preferred over other 
interventions to reduce antibiotic prescribing. We also recommend the following 
and have included example activities for: (i) reducing demand for immediate 
antibiotics; (ii) framing DP as an 'active' prescribing option; (iii) 
documenting the decision-making process around DP; and (iv) facilitating social 
and system support.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-024-20248-8
PMCID: PMC11476980
PMID: 39402467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BH works for eConsult, a provider of 
asynchronous consultations in primary, secondary, and urgent/emergency care. 
Other authors declare no conflict of interest.